looking out into beautiful woods from a nice sitting room at 31 Forest Drive with Mac Prescott.
And let's see, now use your mic and see if it works.
I am sitting here with Haskell looking not out at the pretty woods, but at the front entrance.
To begin,
Mike, would you describe your experience growing up and World War II and academic experience before you came to A&M?
I was born and reared in San Marcos.
My parents, my mother was a native San Marcos.
My father was from North Texas, and they settled there after my father's return from service in France in World War II, where he had been wounded by a gas attack.
San Marcos at that time had a population of about 5,000 and didn't seem to change much during the time I was growing up.
Of course, the earliest thing I can remember, or one of the earliest things I can remember is the stock market crash of 1929 and the ensuing depression which left its mark on my generation from then until the present time.
I attended San Marcos Academy for one year.
My mother taught me first grade subjects.
She had been a teacher, had been an English teacher, and also had taught elementary grades earlier.
And she taught me first grade subjects at home, and I entered the second grade at San Marcos Academy.
And then, the depression being what it was, I transferred to public schools the next year because there wasn't any tuition there, whereas there was at the academy.
And I went through the public schools in San Marcos, graduating from high school in 1938.
and immediately entered what was then Southwest Texas State Teachers College, which was quite small, 1,200 probably enrollment at that time.
There I was under the influence of some teachers whom I would call inspirational, as a matter of fact.
They were devoted to teaching, but some of them still had a strong commitment to research, and this undoubtedly affected my view on a future career, particularly
I was influenced by a professor named Dr. C. Spurgeon Smith, who was head of the Department of Biology and who was
A graduate of the University of Chicago, his PhD was from the University of Chicago, where he worked under the eminent physiologist A.J.
Carlson.
He inspired in all of us a desire to do research and to achieve things in a scientific field.
I graduated in the summer of 1941 with a bachelor's degree in chemistry and a minor in biology and went down to enlist in the U.S.
Navy in what they call the V-5 program, V-7 program, I believe it was.
It was for deck officers.
One was for flight officers, one for deck officers.
I've forgotten the numeral by which they're designated.
and it was found that I had a disorder in one of my kidneys.
It turned out that it was displaced and not functioning properly, so I had an operation in the fall of 1941, spent three weeks in Santa Rosa Hospital in San Antonio getting my corrective measures done, and then was still recuperating
On December 7th, 1941, when I was resting at home alone in the afternoon, my parents were off visiting relatives, also in San Marcos, called and said, are you listening to the radio?
And I said, no.
And they said, turn it on.
The Japanese have attacked Pearl Harbor.
So as soon thereafter as I could pass a physical, I enlisted.
But meanwhile, I worked for about a year at the Dow Chemical Company.
As a matter of fact, I enlisted on July 24, 1942 and was immediately sent back to Dow Chemical to await a call up to duty.
Evidently, the backlog of personnel had grown so big that they couldn't accommodate everyone.
I was called to active duty in March of 1943 and was sent to training in meteorology and still ground duty because of my operation.
I graduated from meteorology school in November of 43 and was immediately assigned to San Marcos Army Airfield back in my hometown where I served in the base weather office and later then as an instructor in meteorology of the cadets who were navigation students.
Subsequently, late in the war,
By the way, once you got in training command, essentially you couldn't get out of training command in World War II.
They tended to leave you there a long time.
But late in the war, a teletype came through wanting two officers of my military specialty to report to Clovis, New Mexico for overseas assignment.
And one of my friends and I volunteered and we got there, found our delight that they wanted us to fly weather reconnaissance.
And so we had to pass a flight physical.
And it's interesting that when the Army needed you to fly, you could pass the physical without much difficulty.
So I did.
And went overseas as a weather reconnaissance officer on the B-29 crew.
I replaced the bombardier, and they installed weather instruments instead of a bombsite in our airplane.
and I got over there just weeks before the war ended.
Where were we?
We went first of all to Tinian, joined the 58th Bomb Wing there,
and stayed there until sometime after the war.
And then we were sent down to Guam and made a part of the 502nd Bomb Group, which was in the 315th Wing.
I was in the 468th Wing, excuse me, 468th Group, 58th Wing on Tanyan.
I was in the 502nd Group, 315th Wing on Guam.
Fountain Tanya and Guam, both very interesting places.
They were a much more pleasant climate than I expected, except that during the rainy season, it rained all the time, essentially.
In the dry season, it just rained once a day.
But they were, temperature-wise, they were very moderate, and there were a lot of interesting things on the islands.
I had become engaged before I went overseas, and so when I was
When my overseas assignment was essentially over with, I was put on orders to come home.
I came back, got back in the States in May of 46, and married Katherine Ann Kelly June 8, 1946.
All right, then after that, you went back to school?
I had worked for Dow Chemical, as I said, Texas Division.
And after we married, I went down to Freeport to talk to them about resuming my job because the so-called GI Bill of Rights required an employer to offer a job to a person who had held it before entering military service.
While I was there, one of my friends mentioned that A&M was hiring lab instructors.
full-time and I thought this would be a good chance for me to see if I like graduate work because I could do it on a part-time basis and if I like teaching and so I that very day I drove up to College Station from Freeport met with Dr. C.C.
Hedges head of the chemistry department and he hired me on the spot the system then in chemistry was that there were two lectures one recitation and a laboratory each week
And the lectures were given by senior faculty members, usually full professors.
And the recitation and the laboratories were conducted by instructors.
We were really laboratory instructors, but they gave us the academic title of instructor.
And each of us attended the lectures that our sections would be attending.
So we knew exactly what had been covered in the lectures.
When I started, the professor during the lecturing was Dr. Empty Harrington.
And as a matter of fact, he had also taken the recitation and laboratory sections as an overload, and he was glad to see me arrive because I took these off of his hands.
Describe, let's sidelight on him.
Describe him as a lecturer, teacher.
He was superb.
He was articulate and very clear, and I understand I'm talking just about freshman chemistry now, nothing advanced, but he was known for his clarity and for his ability to convey the ideas to the students and keep them awake.
Since almost every faculty member had a nickname, did he have one?
Not that I know of.
I haven't heard it either.
But I've heard many people speak of him as a fine teacher.
He was.
And a thoroughgoing gentleman.
Very, very polite, very affable and friendly.
Easy to get along with.
Was he yet an administrator of any sort?
No, but he became one that September.
He was selected.
to be the de facto dean at brian field now the decision has been made by the then board of directors to separate the incoming freshmen from the extant upperclassmen and to do that for four years consecutively to break up the hazing and this is the fall of 40 46. so they occupied on i don't know what kind of agreement with the army army air
uh... by this time the air force i was still part of the army one forty six but in at any rate the students were housed in barracks out there and the uh... some of the buildings have been converted to lecture and laboratory space and uh... crude but adequate for the purpose and uh... i was assigned to teach out there and the they had converted part of the old hospital to uh... deficiency apartments and and it was uh...
It was really a startling thing to see what your apartment might consist of.
You might have a lot of space, but it wasn't always very convenient.
But anyhow, it was adequate, and we lived out there, and for the graduate courses I took, I commuted into the campus.
Now, how did you and your new wife, where did you acquire the furnishings?
We just accumulated them somewhere, what we now call garage sales, and families would give us things.
And it seems to me that maybe, it may be that the apartments out there had a stove and a refrigerator, but I'm not sure.
We may have had to furnish that ourselves, too.
What was your compensation that first year?
Do you remember?
I don't know, but I can look it up for you in a few minutes.
I think I have all my forms $500 from those days.
It was probably on the order of $250, $300 a month, which is pretty good.
And you thought at that time that your career goal was to be an academic?
I was trying to see if that's what I wanted to do.
It turned out I did like teaching.
I did like the idea of doing research, and so I did this for a couple of years.
And at that time, I realized that part-time graduate work was not the best way to go about it.
And I met a young faculty member in what was then the Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, a brand new department formed in 1947.
Dr. Barnard S. Schweigert, who was actually a couple of months younger than I was,
had come here as an associate professor and I had begun doing some research with him while I was still teaching full-time.
And then in the fall of 1948,
Let me think just a minute.
I can get my time.
At any rate, he left, I guess, about the summer of 48, and Dr. Lyman offered me an assistantship, a research assistantship for the year 48, 49.
In biochemistry.
In biochemistry, so I could finish my degree.
And so I worked with Dr. Lyman as his lab assistant, did my own research, published two papers in the Journal of Biological Chemistry.
and graduated in the spring of 49 with a major in biochemistry and a minor in chemistry.
And then I decided for sure that I was going for a PhD and sent out my application to the University of Wisconsin.
Meanwhile, Dr. Carl Pearson, excuse me, Dr. Paul Pearson
who was Dean of the Graduate School and also the head of biochemistry had recommended me at Berkeley and I got an offer of an assistantship at Berkeley and one at Wisconsin and for reasons I can't articulate particularly well I took the one at Wisconsin and
I guess it's mostly because the man who offered me the assistantship was quite famous, was well-known, and I didn't balance the advantages of having a famous professor or of having a famous university.
Although Wisconsin certainly is a fine university, no problem about that.
Later, when winter set in in Wisconsin, I did regret my decision.
Katie and I by this time had our first child, Steve, and we moved to Wisconsin and I took up graduate work.
Interestingly enough, the landlord association was powerful enough there that they could prevent the university from building student housing.
And for marriage student housing,
the university of wisconsin took over the old badger munitions plant which was 33 miles north of madison so i rode a bus 33 miles to and from work each commuting 66 miles total each day but uh
On the other hand, being out there, it was in the country, and it was pleasant for Katie and Steve.
It was essentially farmland, and we had a garden.
Incidentally, it's interesting to watch a garden.
They don't have long to grow, so you go out and plant it, and the next day it's here, and the next day it's here.
And I then...
After two years up there, my professor accepted an offer from the University of Texas at Austin, and I had to decide if I was going to start my research over under one of the Wisconsin faculty members or if I was going to accompany him to Austin.
I decided I'd go to Austin with him because arrangements were made between Dr. Roger Williams, head of Biochemical Institute at Austin, and Dr. Elvium, who was head of biochemistry and also dean of the graduate school at Madison, that Wisconsin would let several of us take our last year of residence at Austin and give us full credit for it, and Dr. Williams very generously agreed to give us assistantships at UT.
So also it was, my father was in wretched health at this time so it was a help to my mother for me to be 30 miles away.
So we moved to Austin and I finished my work there in another year.
Went back to Madison and defended my dissertation and graduated.
So in that year you graduated?
1952.
I graduated in the summer of 1952, August of 52.
What was it like to get a first job in that era?
Well, I had, actually I had two offers, and they were both academic.
I decided that I probably wanted to do academic work instead of
Instead of industrial, I enjoyed the research, but in academic research, I could choose what I wanted to do.
In industrial research, I couldn't.
I was offered a job at Michigan State as an assistant professor.
Dr. Lawrence Quill was head of the chemistry department, and at that time, biochemistry at Michigan State was in the chemistry department.
And I got a letter from Dr. Quill
I gave a seminar up there one day.
at their invitation and got a letter subsequently saying the full and associate professors voted unanimously to offer you the vacant position of assistant professor of biochemistry.
And that was quite a temptation because it was a good department and Michigan State was at that time much better recognized than A&M.
And it was going fast.
And going fast.
And so Dr. Lyman then offered me a position back here in my old department where I'd taken my master's degree.
And Harry Kunkel and I had been graduate students here together.
Then he had been an instructor and postdoc at Madison when I was still a graduate student there.
So Harry and I crossed trails a couple of times, knew and liked each other, and he was a large part of persuading, I think, of persuading Dr. Lyman to offer me the job and persuading me to come.
I appeared here in September of 52, and my salary, you'll want to know, was $5,000 for 12 months.
For 12 months?
For 12 months.
Were you a full, did they then have Experiment Station Extension Service appointment?
I was, they had started that in 47, I believe, and I was three-quarter time Experiment Station, one-quarter time college, as it was then.
and biochemistry was over in agriculture.
Biochemistry was and still is in agriculture.
Our department was not physically together.
Dr. Lyman, Dr. J.R.
Couch, I believe Dr. Herman Schlink was still here at the time.
All of them had space in the animal industry building.
Dr. Couch on first floor and Dr. Lyman and Dr. Schlenk and Harry Kunkel on fourth floor.
And I was given one half of a lab bench on the fourth floor.
Dr. Richardson was on the old experiment station building, the old red building, as was Dr. Reiser.
And when Dr. Lyman became department head, he shortly thereafter vacated the space he had in the field lab, which was a house, a converted residence out on the experiment station farm.
And later that was taken over by Dr. Reiser, who continued there for many years.
That's Dr. Raymond Reiser.
Dr. Raymond Reiser.
And we, so our department was spread out in five different places.
What were the...
topical areas of emphasis then in biochemistry, the research areas?
Very largely nutritional biochemistry.
It was what I would call the last of the really intensive work in nutritional biochemistry and doctors
riser and couch became particularly well known in their in their particular riser and lipid nutrition and metabolism couch in um... poultry nutrition and applications thereof uh... richardson also did extremely good work in in this field doctor lyman was in and out of that as well as uh...
old microbial metabolism and some things.
I worked very, at the very start I worked in microbial metabolism pathways and then later shifted my emphasis to enzyme systems.
As you began, what funding was made available to you?
The first funding I had was from the experiment station and it was called feed control funds and it was funds
I think the feed control service, I know they collected funds for the analysis and certification of feeds and then
That was made available to the director of the station.
He allocated it out for research projects.
You had to write a project proposal and send it in.
And then later I had hatch money.
And then, of course, I was also given a hunting license to go out to National Institutes of Health or anyone that, any granting agency of that type that I wanted to.
Looking back on it, how would you describe the
way in which you as a newcomer was received by your colleagues and others?
I hadn't really thought about it.
Of course, they had all known me as a student.
In fact,
Dr. L.R.
Richardson, Dr. Lyman had been on my committee.
I can't remember who was on from chemistry right now.
I'd known Dr. Reiser not well, but I was certainly not celebrated, but on the other hand, I wasn't put down in any way.
You felt you were accepted from day one as a colleague?
You were not treated like a... As a junior colleague, I would say, yes.
But you were not treated like you were a student.
No, no.
And it's because I'd been away to get my terminal degree.
And let's see, by 52, most of the veteran students were gone.
Pretty much.
So you're dealing with students just out of high school and so forth.
Right.
What were your teaching responsibilities in those early years?
Dr. Lyman greeted me on the first day with the request that I take over the first graduate course and its laboratory, which is offered fall only.
and it really kept me busy because fortunately I'd just been through all this in my own PhD work but I had to assemble the notes and work out the experiments.
I probably used pretty much the experiments that he and Dr. Couch and Dr. Pearson had used for several years before me.
Gradually I worked my own experiments into the laboratory and
I had had an extremely good laboratory course at Wisconsin, and I found out one thing about laboratories at Wisconsin, they really meant business.
And if you were assigned to do 15 experiments in a semester, 14 would not do.
If you wanted to pass the course, you had to do 15.
And this was pretty well acquired for all entering graduate biochemistry?
For all biochemistry students.
And then a lot of the students who took it came from outside.
They might be, Plant Science has sent us a lot of students.
And you know, of course, that that department has changed names several times.
It used to be Plant Physiology and Pathology.
There's Plant Science.
Now I think it's Plant Pathology again.
At any rate, well, for example, Paige Morgan was one of my early students in the course.
And then also there would be quite a few of the veterinary pathology students would be in there.
And, oh, quite a few others.
Let's see.
One thing, I've kept all my old grade books.
I simply can't, I cannot throw away the old grade books.
And one of the hardest discarding I did was when I gave up my laboratory and retired 11 years ago.
I threw all of my students' data books in the dumpster.
That was a wrench.
I can understand that.
But the data had been published.
I mean, it was... Describe, in general, describe those students.
What were they like?
What were their motivations?
They were... Many of them were war veterans.
And, of course, they're all male.
All male.
And...
They were, in general, polite and industrious.
They wanted to succeed.
Were most of them Southwesterners?
Most of them were.
Occasionally there'd be somebody from far away like Indiana or New York.
Masters and doctors.
About how many doctoral degrees did the department produce then per year?
I don't know.
And its first year of Ph.D.
granting was in 1950.
Orlando Ochesi and Don Hood received the first two degrees.
We had an observation of the 50th anniversary of the department in 1997, and Ochesi, who had a very distinguished career in Peru, as you know,
He was, what, he was rector of the university.
Wasn't he minister of agriculture too?
I think so.
And Don Hood, who had quite a distinguished career in oceanographic research.
Don moved from biochemistry to oceanography, biological oceanography, chemical oceanography.
I'll get it right in a minute.
And retired from the departmentship head in Alaska, or he may have been dean, I don't recall, but he moved halfway home.
He moved to Washington.
After this first year, what was your, as you thought of it, what was your first important step of achievement?
To get some research going, get some manuscripts accepted, and get a grant.
How long did that take?
Oh, let's see.
I probably got a paper out the next, well I still of course had some residual work with my research advisor and I think that I trailed off a couple of papers with him after I came over here and then it must have been
Uh, 53 or 54 that I got some manuscripts accepted, and I don't remember when I got a grant, first got a grant, but... And where was the first big grant from?
Well, I didn't have any big grants in those days, but if you hoarded your money, you could... Oh, gosh, I don't remember that.
Either the National Institutes of Health or...
Office of Naval Research.
Were you given any advice as to how much of grant money would be expected gradually to?
No, that really wasn't done in those days.
I'm sure it may be done now, but it wasn't at all done in those days.
They just expected you to figure it out.
Neither was I given any advice on how to go about it.
And I'm also implicating my former, my PhD advisor who didn't give you any kind of clues on
on how to run a program or fund it.
In those early years, if you needed advice about the way things were done at A&M, who did you turn to?
Usually Dr. Carl Lyman, my department head.
He was a level-headed guy.
Describe his style of leadership.
Minimal control.
He was very
very relaxed um well not in not in a sense i mean he was a hard he was a hard worker but his administrative style was pretty pretty relaxed we used to laugh he kept a whole lot of file folders of manila folders
And you could go in and say, Dr. Lyman, I'd like to talk to you about getting an analytical ultracentrifuge.
And he'd take a sheet of paper, and he'd write analytical ultracentrifuge.
And you'd finish your discussion, and he'd slide it in one of those, in one of those manila folders.
And you'd notice that he hadn't written down any suggestions or anything else.
He'd just put the topic down there.
But he was...
Oh, I would say pretty much hands-off, and particularly with respect to the faculty members.
In fact, at one time we were, somebody referred to us as the Six Kingdoms or the Seven Kingdoms or something like that because he expected each faculty member to operate his own program.